Spectro Inspector  v5
=====================
Real-time quality control and session monitoring tool for astronomical spectroscopy.
Designed for use at the telescope with a red astronomy filter (night-vision palette).
Compatible with slit spectrographs (Star'Ex) and slitless systems (SA100 / SA200).
Works with any FITS-based acquisition software (SharpCap, N.I.N.A., etc.).
Raw science frames are never modified.


REQUIREMENTS
------------
  Python 3.11+
  pip install astropy PyQt6 matplotlib scipy


HOW TO RUN
----------
  python spectro_tool.py
  (or double-click run.bat on Windows)


QUICK START
-----------
1. Click "Select Folder" and point it at your FITS output directory.
   The tool loads the most recent file immediately and watches for new ones.

2. Optionally enter a Filter pattern (e.g. *alfCyg*) to restrict which files are
   watched. The N/T counter shows matched vs. total FITS files in real time.

3. Drag the coloured handles on the image (or edit the Y spinboxes) to place the
   TARGET and background (BG ABOVE / BG BELOW) extraction bands over your star trace.

4. If the spectral trace is not perfectly horizontal, use the Rotate° spinbox to
   correct the tilt (±5°, bicubic spline). The rotation is applied in memory only —
   raw files are never modified.

5. Read the Exposure Advisory panel on the right:
   - Peak fill      — how full the brightest target pixel is relative to the sat. limit
   - Peak SNR       — signal-to-noise at the brightest wavelength column
   - Frames: SNR 100 — stacked frames needed to reach SNR 100 (√N scaling)
   - Noise regime   — background-limited, read-noise-limited, or signal-limited
   - Exp. suggestion — suggested exposure time to reach ~80 % of the sat. limit

6. Click "Gain Advice: OFF" in the Exposure Advisory header to enable a full
   ASI585MM Pro gain analysis (HCG mode, read noise, full well, gain recommendation).

7. Use "⊕ Zoom" above the image or below the spectrum chart to rubber-band zoom;
   both canvases synchronise on the X-axis. "Zoom to range" (below the spectrum)
   scales the Y-axis so the spectrum peak sits at 80 % of the visible height.
   Click "↺ Reset" to restore the full view. Zoom settings persist across file loads.

8. Hold/Latest radio buttons (in the image section header) control whether the
   display updates when new frames arrive. The image title shows "HOLD FITS Image"
   when Hold is active.

9. Switch to the "Session Monitor" tab to track multi-frame session quality.

10. Use "Step Through Files" to replay all existing FITS frames from oldest to newest
    before switching to live polling.


SPECTRUM VIEW
-------------
- White line: hot-pixel-filtered peak ADU per wavelength column (2nd-highest pixel
  across all TARGET rows — removes single hot pixels without clipping real signal).
- Amber line: sky background level per column from the BG regions (sigma-clipped mean).
- Dashed red line: linearity limit at 80 % of the full ADU range (52 428 for 16-bit).
  Columns with peak pixels above this line are shaded red.
- Y-axis spans the full sensor ADU range (0–65 535 for 16-bit), fixed, so you can
  judge available headroom at a glance regardless of target brightness.
- Zoom buttons below the chart: ⊕ Zoom (rubber-band both axes), "Zoom to range"
  (Y scale so spectrum peak sits at 80 % of visible range), ↺ Reset. Zoom settings
  persist across file loads.


SESSION MONITOR TAB
-------------------
Set "Flatness threshold" (ADU/col) to control which wavelength columns are considered
flat continuum. Default 500 ADU/col.

▶ Slit Quality Metrics (click to expand)
  Four metrics on a shared "% from session baseline" y-axis. Baseline = mean of the
  first 5 included frames with a valid value for each metric. Toggle each metric with
  the checkboxes above the chart.

  Integrated Flux (orange)
      Total ADU summed across the extracted 1D spectrum per frame.
      Primary slit-throughput indicator. A sustained drop means the star is walking
      toward a slit jaw.

  Spatial Centroid Y (green-orange)
      Flux-weighted centre of the stellar spatial profile in the Y direction (pixels).
      Drift means the star is moving across the slit; a jump suggests a guiding event.

  Profile Asymmetry (bright orange)
      Flux imbalance above vs below the centroid (%).  Non-zero = star is being clipped
      by one slit edge. Rising asymmetry + falling flux = early slit-loss warning.

  Flux RMS (red)
      Rolling standard deviation of Integrated Flux over the last N frames (RMS window
      spinbox, default 7), normalised to session mean. Spikes near a slit edge because
      seeing fluctuations become amplitude-modulated by the slit transmission function.

  FWHM (optional, off by default)
      Gaussian spatial profile width — a seeing/focus indicator, not a centering metric.
      The Warn% and Alarm% threshold lines apply when FWHM is enabled.

  Reference lines at 0 %, ±10 %, and ±30 % are drawn at low opacity.
  The collapsible header summarises all four primary metrics from the latest frame.

▶ Signal Convergence Monitor
  - Top chart: running mean spectrum with ±N σ/√N confidence envelope (σ configurable).
    Coloured ticks below the x-axis mark columns where a spectral feature persists above
    the Persistence threshold across frames.
  - Bottom sparkline: continuum SNR vs. included frame number. Dashed = ideal √N growth.
    Three or more consecutive frames deviating significantly trigger a warning
    (possible transparency or guiding event).

▶ Frame Manager (click to expand)
  Shows every frame with peak ADU, continuum SNR, FWHM, and inclusion status.
  Auto-flag rules: Low SNR, High FWHM, Saturated, < 10 continuum columns.

  Sorting: click any column header to cycle default → ▲ ascending → ▼ descending.
  Sortable by: frame number, filename, peak ADU, continuum SNR, FWHM, status.

  Nominate & Export:
    - Click "★ Nominate OK" to auto-select all unflagged (included) frames.
    - The ★ checkbox column can be toggled manually per row.
    - Click "Copy ► \nominated" to copy selected files to a nominated\ sub-folder.

  Double-click any row to switch to Hold mode and display that frame in the image canvas.
  New live frames will not update the display until you click "Latest".

  - Uncheck "Incl." to exclude a frame from session statistics.
  - Click "Recompute All" to replay Welford stats after exclusion changes.


LOGBOOK
-------
A notepad text area in the lower-left panel. When a FITS file with an OBJECT header
keyword is loaded, the logbook automatically opens (or creates) a file named
logbook_<TargetName>.txt in the watch folder. The first line of a new logbook contains
the creation timestamp and target name.

Notes are auto-saved 5 seconds after each keystroke, and flushed on application close.

Region settings are automatically appended to the logbook (as a single line) whenever
the TARGET or background band boundaries are changed, after a 2-second debounce.
This records the extraction geometry for later reference or data reduction scripts.


CAMERA NOTES — ZWO ASI 585MM Pro
----------------------------------
The camera has a 12-bit native ADC but writes 16-bit FITS files.
Raw pixel values in FITS = 12-bit ADC output × 16.

Conversion gain used for SNR maths (e⁻ per 16-bit FITS ADU):
  Gain   0  →  0.594 e⁻/ADU    Gain 200 (HCG) →  0.047 e⁻/ADU
  Gain  50  →  0.344            Gain 250       →  0.022
  Gain 100  →  0.188            Gain 300       →  0.011
  Gain 150  →  0.113            Gain 350       →  0.006
  Gain 195  →  0.063            Gain 400       →  0.003
                                Gain 450       →  0.001

HCG mode activates at gain slider ≥ 200.  At gain 200, read noise drops from
~4 e⁻ (normal mode) to ~1 e⁻ — a 4× improvement — at the cost of a smaller
full well (~2 500 e⁻ vs ~4 000 e⁻ at gain 195).

The gain and read-noise values are looked up automatically from the FITS GAIN
header keyword and used in all SNR and advisory calculations.


CONFIGURATION
-------------
Settings are saved automatically to spectro_config.json in the same folder.
You can edit this file directly to adjust defaults.

Key config fields:
  saturation_threshold  — fraction of full ADU range treated as saturated (default 0.70)
  target_fill           — desired fill fraction for exposure suggestions (default 0.80)
  poll_interval_ms      — folder polling interval in milliseconds (default 2000)
  flatness_threshold    — derivative threshold for continuum column detection (default 500)
  file_filter           — filename glob filter, e.g. *alfCyg*  (default: empty = all files)
  rotation_angle        — image rotation in degrees, range ±5° (default 0.0)
  envelope_sigma        — convergence envelope width in σ/√N units (default 1.0)
  persistence_threshold — fraction of frames a feature must appear in to be marked (default 0.70)


FILES
-----
  spectro_tool.py            — main application (single file, ~4 950 lines)
  spectro_config.json        — auto-generated settings file (created on first run)
  logbook_<Target>.txt       — per-target session logbook (created in watch folder)
  nominated\                 — sub-folder created by Frame Manager export
  Description.txt            — this file
